Finland and Estonia See Likely Sabotage in Damage to Pipeline and Telecoms Cable

Suspected leak in natural-gas conduit and fault in communications cable come around anniversary of Nord Stream pipelines blasts.

Finland and Estonia said damage to a natural-gas pipeline and communications cable linking the two North Atlantic Treaty Organization members likely resulted from sabotage, rekindling concerns about the safety of Europe’s critical infrastructure.

The damage was discovered days after the first anniversary of the destruction of the Nord Stream pipelines linking Germany and Russia, an attack that accelerated a reshaping of Europe’s energy map and greatly limited Russia’s ability to supply energy to the region. Authorities in the region have since said the destruction of those pipelines by powerful explosions was deliberate but haven’t officially identified a suspect. U.S. suspicions have increasingly centered on a group of Ukrainians.

The Nord Stream blasts exposed the vulnerability of Europe’s infrastructure to physical attacks, spurring governments to protect the pipelines, energy grids and natural-gas terminals that keep Europe’s lights on and homes heated.

Over the weekend, authorities shut down the undersea Balticconnector between Finland and Estonia after detecting a suspected leak in the 48-mile offshore section of the pipeline. In addition, Finnish authorities found a fault in a communication cable between Finland and Estonia.

Around the same time, a telecommunications cable linking Estonia to Finland, lying about 230 feet below the Baltic Sea, ceased transmitting data, Estonian Defense Minister Hanno Pevkur added. The cable is one of Estonia’s nine such connections to the surrounding countries, and its rupture won’t inflict any noticeable disruption to internet service, he added.

On Tuesday, Finland’s President Sauli Niinistö said that the damage to the gas pipeline and the cable was likely the result of “external activity.” He said that the incident had no impact on the country’s security of supply.

“The damage to the underwater infrastructure has been taken seriously and its causes have been investigated since Sunday,” he said in a statement.

Finland Prime Minister Petteri Orpo said the pipeline damage couldn’t have occurred as a result of normal use or pressure fluctuations, according to Finnish public broadcaster Yle.
NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg said the alliance was sharing information and stands ready to support concerned member states. 

A benchmark European gas futures contract rose 12% Tuesday, after the outbreak of fighting in Israel and Gaza spurred a jump in energy prices earlier in the week.

An unusual drop in pressure shortly before 2 a.m. on Sunday prompted the Finnish and Estonian gas system operators to shut down the pipeline’s valves and halt gas transmission. The gas leak caused by the damage to the pipeline has been stopped, according to Gasgrid Finland, the Finnish state-owned transmission system operator.

There was very little environmental damage to the surrounding Baltic Sea, compared with the Nord Stream attacks, Estonian Climate Minister Kristen Michal told reporters. There was no explosion, Pevkur said.

As authorities investigate the incident, it isn’t yet clear what could have caused the leak. The Finnish-Estonian seismic monitoring system didn’t detect any seismological events in the vicinity of the Balticconnector pipeline around that time, said Heidi Soosalu, senior geologist at the Geological Survey of Estonia.

“Thus, there are no seismic signs of a blast or an explosion,” Soosalu said, adding that if any occurred, it would have been too small to be registered.

On Tuesday, the Finnish and Estonian gas authorities launched an operation to identify the leak site and the extent of the damage. Repair work may take at least several months depending on the nature of the damage, Gasgrid Finland said.

The Balticconnector pipeline closure isn’t expected to affect supply in the region. Finnish gas supply is secured through a floating liquefied natural-gas terminal. The terminal can deliver enough gas for the winter months when demand is typically higher, according to Gasgrid Finland. Russia cut off gas flows to Finland in May 2022 after Helsinki refused to pay Moscow in rubles for the fuel.

Estonian gas consumers are receiving gas from Latvia, Estonian gas system operator Elering said.

Since the Nord Stream blasts, there have been sporadic acts of sabotage or unexplained failures affecting European infrastructure, including a sophisticated attack on Germany’s rail network and a mysterious power outage in Denmark.

In the case of the Nord Stream and Nord Stream 2 pipelines, three of the four lines were severed by underwater blasts in Swedish and Danish waters in the Baltic Sea that prosecutors said were caused by planted explosives on Sept. 26 last year.

Days earlier, a group of people whom prosecutors believe to be Ukrainian rented a boat called Andromeda in northern Germany, The Wall Street Journal has reported. The boat was rented through Ukrainian-owned entities. German investigators have been examining evidence that suggests the sabotage team used Poland, a European Union neighbor and NATO ally, as an operating base to blow up the pipelines.

Ukraine and Russia have denied having anything to do with the explosions.  
